---
title: "Springs and Wings: Energetic Consequences of Deformable Structures in Insect Flight"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-06-24-iPoLS
venue: 
date: 2018-06-24
location: "Houston, Texas"
---

Flapping flight at the centimeter scale is one of the most energetically demanding modes of locomotion. In flying insects, the power muscles deform a stiff, parallel elastic exoskeleton that indirectly strains the elastic wing hinge to drive the wing. In this configuration, power requirements may be reduced via elastic energy storage and return. The wing hinge has been implicated in energetics due to the presence of resilin – the most elastically efficient biological protein yet discovered. Cross-bridges in muscle may also store and return energy. However, both of these structures have relatively low stiffness and displacement amplitudes, so the exoskeleton may play a dominant energetic role. To understand the energetic consequences of this actuation method, we characterized the dynamic material properties of the thorax with removed and intact musculature in the hawkmoth Manduca sexta. We drove sinusoidal length sweeps from 0.1 to 90 Hz with physiological amplitudes of 0.46 mm. The thorax was 80% elastically efficient in compression and 75% in tension across a wide range of frequencies and amplitudes with both removed and intact musculature. This high resilience lead to a total body-mass specific power return of 6 W kg-1, which reduces inertial power demands by 20%. We find that the thorax can be modeled as a linear, structural damped system.